storage in linux
Disk Partitions: MBR vs GPT
MBR: Master boot record max 2TB no more then 4 Partitions: 
GPT: GUID Partition Table 128 partitions
Block Storage: Block storage is another name for what the Linux kernel calls a block device
Commands for making Partitions:
lsblk view all disks
fdisk for MBR
sudo fdisk --list /dev/nvme0n2 
gdisk for GPT
sudo gdisk -l /dev/nvme0n2
parted disk utility tool
sudo parted /dev/sda3
Formatting and Filesystems:
Ext4:Extended file system verion 4 The most popular default filesystem is Ext4
sudo mkfs.ext4 /dev/nvme0n2p1
sudo e2label /dev/nvme0n2p1 data
XFS: specializes in performance and large data files. It formats quickly
sudo mkfs.xfs /dev/nvme0n2p2
sudo xfs_admin -L dataxfs /dev/nvme0n2p2
Btrfs: is a modern, feature-rich copy-on-write filesystem. used in NAS (networked-attached storage)
ZFS: is another copy-on-write filesystem and volume manager with a robust and mature feature set

Logical Volume Manager: Creating single logical volumes of multiple physical volumes or entire hard disks
Physical volumes: Physical disks attached to your server
sudo pvscan
sudo pvcreate /dev/nvme0n2p1 /dev/nvme0n2p2
volume group: attached disks all group
sudo vgcreate vg1 /dev/nvme0n2p1 /dev/nvme0n2p2
sudo vgscan
logical valumes:An allocation of storage that is less than or more than one physical drive
sudo lvscan
sudo lvcreate -L 3G vg1 -n lv1
mirrorvg

Backup
Full Backup: A full backup is the most complete type of backup where you clone all the selected data.
Differential Backup: A differential backup straddles the line between a full and an incremental backup. 
 	This type of backup involves backing up data that was created or changed since the last full backup
Incremental Backup: The first backup in an incremental backup is a full backup. 
 	The succeeding backups will only store changes that were made to the previous backup.

Tools to create backup
tar: stands for tape archive, is used to create Archive and extract the Archive files. tar
dar: DAR Disk archive. It can create backup/archive for full disk or a group of files
scp: Secure Copy is a means of securley transferring files between two machines on a network. SCP uses SSH 
SFTP:(Safe File Transfer Protocol) part of the SSH designed to securely transfer files between remote systems.
rsync: Rsync is a command-line tool for copying files and directories between local and remote systems
mirrorvg:it takes all the logical volumes on a given volume group and mirrors those logical volumes
dd: is a command-line utility for Unix and Unix-like operating systems whose primary purpose is to convert and copy 
	files


